Serv. Find them out whose names are written here? It is written that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter with his nets; but I am sent to find those persons whose names are here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath here writ. I must to the learned. In good time!

Enter Benvolio and Romeo.

  Ben. Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;
    One pain is lessoned by another's anguish;
    Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
    One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
    Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
    And the rank poison of the old will die.
Rom. Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.

Ben. For what, I pray thee?

Rom. For your broken shin.

Ben. Why, Romeo, art thou mad?

  Rom. Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;
    Shut up in Prison, kept without my food,
    Whipp'd and tormented and- God-den, good fellow.
Serv. God gi' go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?

Rom. Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

Serv. Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you read anything you see?

Rom. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.

Serv. Ye say honestly. Rest you merry!

Rom. Stay, fellow; I can read. He reads.

      'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
      County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
      The lady widow of Vitruvio;
      Signior Placentio and His lovely nieces;
      Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
      Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
      My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;
      Signior Valentio and His cousin Tybalt;
      Lucio and the lively Helena.'
    [Gives back the paper.] A fair assembly. Whither should they
    come?
Serv. Up.

Rom. Whither?

Serv. To supper, to our house.

Rom. Whose house?

Serv. My master's.

Rom. Indeed I should have ask'd you that before.

  Serv. Now I'll tell you without asking. My master is the great
    rich Capulet; and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray
    come and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry! Exit.
  Ben. At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
    Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;
    With all the admired beauties of Verona.
    Go thither, and with unattainted eye
    Compare her face with some that I shall show,
    And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
  Rom. When the devout religion of mine eye
    Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
    And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,
    Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
    One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
    Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
  Ben. Tut! you saw her fair, none else being by,
    Herself pois'd with herself in either eye;
    But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
    Your lady's love against some other maid
    That I will show you shining at this feast,
    And she shall scant show well that now seems best.
  Rom. I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
    But to rejoice in splendour of my own. [Exeunt.]
Scene III. Capulet's house.
Enter Capulet's Wife, and Nurse.

Wife. Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.

  Nurse. Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
    I bade her come. What, lamb! what ladybird!
    God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
Enter Juliet.

Jul. How now? Who calls?

Nurse. Your mother.

  Jul. Madam, I am here.
    What is your will?
  Wife. This is the matter- Nurse, give leave awhile,
    We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again;
    I have rememb'red me, thou's hear our counsel.
    Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
Nurse. Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

Wife. She's not fourteen.

  Nurse. I'll lay fourteen of my teeth-
    And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four-
    She is not fourteen. How long is it now
    To Lammastide?
Wife. A fortnight and odd days.

  Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year,
    Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
    Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
    Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
    She was too good for me. But, as I said,
    On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;
    That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
    'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
    And she was wean'd (I never shall forget it),
    Of all the days of the year, upon that day;
    For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
    Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
    My lord and you were then at Mantua.
    Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
    When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
    Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
    To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
    Shake, quoth the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow,
    To bid me trudge.
    And since that time it is eleven years,
    For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood,
    She could have run and waddled all about;
    For even the day before, she broke her brow;
    And then my husband (God be with his soul!
    'A was a merry man) took up the child.
    'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
    Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
    Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidam,
    The pretty wretch left crying, and said 'Ay.'
    To see now how a jest shall come about!
    I warrant, an I should live a thousand yeas,
    I never should forget it. 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he,
    And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said 'Ay.'
Wife. Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.

  Nurse. Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh
    To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
    And yet, I warrant, it bad upon it brow
    A bump as big as a young cock'rel's stone;
    A perilous knock; and it cried bitterly.
    'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?
    Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
    Wilt thou not, Jule?' It stinted, and said 'Ay.'
Jul. And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.

  Nurse. Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
    Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd.
    An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
  Wife. Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
    I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
    How stands your disposition to be married?
Jul. It is an honour that I dream not of.

  Nurse. An honour? Were not I thine only nurse,
    I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
  Wife. Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you,
    Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
    Are made already mothers. By my count,
    I was your mother much upon these years
    That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
    The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
  Nurse. A man, young lady! lady, such a man
    As all the world- why he's a man of wax.
Wife. Verona's summer hath not such a flower.

Nurse. Nay, he's a flower, in faith- a very flower.

  Wife. What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
    This night you shall behold him at our feast.
    Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
    And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
    Examine every married lineament,
    And see how one another lends content;
    And what obscur'd in this fair volume lies
    Find written in the margent of his eyes,
    This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
    To beautify him only lacks a cover.
    The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
    For fair without the fair within to hide.
    That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
    That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
    So shall you share all that he doth possess,
    By having him making yourself no less.
Nurse. No less? Nay, bigger! Women grow by men

Wife. Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?

  Jul. I'll look to like, if looking liking move;
    But no more deep will I endart mine eye
    Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
Enter Servingman.

Serv. Madam, the guests are come, supper serv'd up, you call'd, my young lady ask'd for, the nurse curs'd in the pantry, and everything in extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you follow straight.

  Wife. We follow thee. Exit [Servingman].
    Juliet, the County stays.
  Nurse. Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
                                                         Exeunt.
Scene IV. A street.
Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or six other Maskers;
Torchbearers.
  Rom. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
    Or shall we on without apology?
  Ben. The date is out of such prolixity.
    We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
    Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
    Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper;
    Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
    After the prompter, for our entrance;
    But, let them measure us by what they will,
    We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
  Rom. Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
    Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
Mer. Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.

  Rom. Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
    With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead
    So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
  Mer. You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
    And soar with them above a common bound.
  Rom. I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
    To soar with his light feathers; and so bound
    I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
    Under love's heavy burthen do I sink.
  Mer. And, to sink in it, should you burthen love-
    Too great oppression for a tender thing.
  Rom. Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
    Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.
  Mer. If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
    Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
    Give me a case to put my visage in.
    A visor for a visor! What care I
    What curious eye doth quote deformities?
    Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
  Ben. Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in
    But every man betake him to his legs.
  Rom. A torch for me! Let wantons light of heart
    Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
    For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase,
    I'll be a candle-holder and look on;
    The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
  Mer. Tut! dun's the mouse, the constable's own word!
    If thou art Dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
    Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
    Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
Rom. Nay, that's not so.

  Mer. I mean, sir, in delay
    We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
    Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
    Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
  Rom. And we mean well, in going to this masque;
    But 'tis no wit to go.
Mer. Why, may one ask?

Rom. I dreamt a dream to-night.

Mer. And so did I.

Rom. Well, what was yours?

Mer. That dreamers often lie.

Rom. In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.

  Mer. O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
    She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
    In shape no bigger than an agate stone
    On the forefinger of an alderman,
    Drawn with a team of little atomies
    Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
    Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
    The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
    Her traces, of the smallest spider's web;
    Her collars, of the moonshine's wat'ry beams;
    Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
    Her wagoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
    Not half so big as a round little worm
    Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
    Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
    Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
    Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
    And in this state she 'gallops night by night
    Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
    O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on cursies straight;
    O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
    O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
    Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
    Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
    Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
    And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
    And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
    Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep,
    Then dreams he of another benefice.
    Sometimes she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
    And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
    Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
    Of healths five fadom deep; and then anon
    Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
    And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
    And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
    That plats the manes of horses in the night
    And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish, hairs,
    Which once untangled much misfortune bodes
    This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
    That presses them and learns them first to bear,
    Making them women of good carriage.
    This is she-
  Rom. Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
    Thou talk'st of nothing.
  Mer. True, I talk of dreams;
    Which are the children of an idle brain,
    Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;
    Which is as thin of substance as the air,
    And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
    Even now the frozen bosom of the North
    And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
    Turning his face to the dew-dropping South.
  Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
    Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
  Rom. I fear, too early; for my mind misgives
    Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,
    Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
    With this night's revels and expire the term
    Of a despised life, clos'd in my breast,
    By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
    But he that hath the steerage of my course
    Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen!
  Ben. Strike, drum.
                           They march about the stage. [Exeunt.]
Scene V. Capulet's house.
Servingmen come forth with napkins.
